# MVC, Materiality, and the Magus: The Rhetoric of Source-Level Production

In this proposed chapter, I will connect three concepts that I believe are central to understanding
the intellectual work of source-level production (programming) as a rhetorical act that binds the
field of rhetoric with broader, production-oriented pursuits in digital humanities.

The three concepts are:

* **Model-View-Controller (MVC) architecture**: In many ways an opportunity to build on
Hart-Davidson’s (2005) rhetoric of objects, relationships, and views, MVC as implemented through the
web-based development framework Ruby on Rails provides a rigorous, rule-bound study of the key
components of source-level production. By isolating data in the model, (HTTP) request-processing in
the controller, and design and interactivity in the view, MVC stands as both an exemplar of the
divisions of labor within digital production and, as I will argue in the chapter, just how shaky and
unnecessary such divisions are.

* **Materiality**: A core argument of my chapter will be that digital materiality must be
foregrounded in discussions of production in rhetoric and DH. My articulation of materiality will
take two forms: first, it will reassert the inherent symbolic and representational (versus
computational) component of *digital*. Second, it will underscore open-source production
technologies and artifacts as a class of digital materials uniquely suited to pursuing and
demonstrating the intellectual work of source-level production, including for tenure and promotion.

* **The Magus**: William Covino’s concept of the magus, as articulated in *Magic, Rhetoric, and
Literacy* (1994), brings together the other two concepts in the chapter into a coherent whole,
emphasizing elements of Kenneth Burke’s symbolic action and dramatism in the
material/representational realm of source-level production. Although digital matters remained
largely untouched in Covino’s study, Covino’s discussions of magic as either “arresting” or
“generative” provide unique insight into the rhetorical nature of source-level production,
particularly in the shift from lines of source code to functional, beautiful digital artifacts
rendered on screens.

What I intend to establish in the chapter is the first steps in a rule-bound, systemic rhetoric of
source-level production. Because I prefer to treat rhetoric as a productive art that puts new things
in the world (versus a hermeneutic rhetoric, which in the extreme reduces rhetoric to a
critical/analytical method, as has been the case in some work falling under “critical code
studies”), I believe that this perspective is uniquely suited to bridging the field of rhetoric with
the existing sense of “maker culture” that already permeates the digital humanities.

By bringing together this trio of concepts, I intend to show both the rhetorical agency of the
rhetorician-programmer/magus, as well as to highlight the divisions of labor (e.g., so-called “idea
people”, developers, and designers) that, counterintuitively, fall apart in a treatment of the
rigorous MVC framework. With its nearly fanatical devotion to MVC and construction in the
object-oriented Ruby language, Rails presents an important alternative to the mishmash of PHP
scripts, plugins, and themes that mark WordPress, Drupal, Omeka, and other go-to frameworks and
systems in DH projects. An ancillary argument in my proposed chapter is that the mishmash of models,
views, and controllers in script-based projects actually contributes to divisions of labor, albeit a
more simple division between those who can program, and those who cannot.

However, rather than write a chapter that proceeds as purely abstract argument, I will illustrate
the magus-programmer role through the construction of a small Ruby on Rails app. Portions of the
source code from the app, as well as the magical incantations that bring the app into being from the
command line, will appear within the chapter itself. I will also maintain a repository, rich with
detailed explanatory commits, of the app on GitHub to exemplify the open, public nature of digital
production as well as showcase ways in which the intellectual work of source-level production can be
presented to committees on tenure and promotion.
