MVC, Materiality, and the Magus: The Rhetoric of Source-Level Production

In this proposed chapter, I will connect three concepts that I believe are central to understanding
the intellectual work of source-level production (programming) as a rhetorical act that binds the
field of rhetoric with broader, production-oriented pursuits in digital humanities.

The three concepts are:

* Model-View-Controller (MVC) architecture: In many ways an opportunity to build on Hart-Davidson’s
(2005) rhetoric of objects, relationships, and views, MVC as implemented through the web-based
development framework Ruby on Rails provides a rigorous, rule-bound study of the key components of
source-level production. With its nearly fanatical devotion to MVC and construction in the
object-oriented Ruby language, Rails presents an important alternative to the mishmash of PHP
scripts, plugins, and themes that mark WordPress, Drupal, Omeka, and other go-to frameworks and
systems in DH projects.

* Materiality: A core argument of my chapter will be that digital materiality must be foregrounded
in discussions of production in rhetoric and DH. My articulation of materiality will take two forms:
first, it will reassert the necessarily symbolic and representational (versus computational)
component of **digital**. Second, it will underscore open-source production technologies and
artifacts as a class of digital materials uniquely suited to pursuing and demonstrating the
intellectual work of source-level production, including for tenure and promotion.

* The Magus: Finally, William Covino’s concept of the magus, as articulated in Magic, Rhetoric, and
Literacy, brings together the other two concepts in the chapter into a coherent whole, emphasizing
elements of Kenneth Burke’s symbolic action and dramatism. Although digital matters remained largely
untouched in Covino’s study, Covino’s discussions of magic as either “arresting” or “generative”
provide unique insight into the rhetorical nature of source-level production, particularly in the
shift from lines of source code to functional, beautiful digital artifacts rendered on screens.



Rather than write a chapter that proceeds as purely abstract argument, I will illustrate the
magus-programmer role through the construction of a small Ruby on Rails app. Portions of the source
code from the app, as well as the magical incantations written on the command line, will appear
within the chapter itself; but I will also maintain a repository of the app on GitHub to exemplify
the open, public nature of digital production as well as showcase ways in which intellectual work
can be demonstrated to committees on tenure and promotion.
